---
title: An Argument For Theism
subtitle: Or why common sense leads to theism
---

<section>

## The statement of the problem

### The logic problem

Most theists and atheists will rely on analytic/deductive arguments and
strategies to make their point in discussions about the existence of divinity.
These strategies have lead all of us to inconclusive results.

All mathematical theories start by setting axioms, which
are thought to be self-evident truths that need no demonstration.
If and when a mathematical theory is shown to be inconsistent,
some of the axioms must be dropped, but not all theorems in the theory
<label for="sn-web-beliefs"
       class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">
</label>
<input type="checkbox"
       id="sn-web-beliefs"
       class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
This phenomenon has been dealt with in details by Pierre Duheim and
Orman Quine.
</span>.

This fact holds even tighter with respect to the theories we
sing about actual objects that can act or be acted upon
<label for="sn-actual-objects"
       class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">
</label>
<input type="checkbox"
       id="sn-actual-objects"
       class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
Peter Geach has a fine discussion on what should be said about actual objects.
</span>.
This comes about because of human ignorance of some causes whose effects will
interfere, or have interfered, in our forecastings or in our beliefs about
present things (but we are still not aware of). The known causes, in our
language, figure as propositions in the conjunction that constitute the
antecedent (also called our assumptions, or premises) in the conditionals we
hold as premises to deduce intellectual or practical conclusions by *modus ponens*.

When we are humbled by an error, we invoke *modus tollens*, naturally. And this
means we must deny the conjunction of our premises. Intellectual honesty, and
logical acuity, forces us to pick and choose which premise to drop, but not
always it is clear which one. In fact, we may ***not even know*** the corresponding
premise of  the cause that falsified our deduction attempt
<label for="sn-falsified-deduction"
       class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">
</label>
<input type="checkbox"
       id="sn-falsified-deduction"
       class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
Example.
</span>.

It follows that deductive reasoning should be thought of as a brute force
strategy to verify and enhance our assumptions. We acquire an intuition of our
premises by induction. We assume the premise and test by experimentation. If our
experiment goes well we are not at all allowed to take that assumption for
granted.  But also, if our expectation is not met, we are not obliged to drop it
either.

This is how things are. This note also shows that careful orchestration
of science experiments is of paramount importance for science.

### Not an argument by ignorance and the meaning problem.

I say this not to vindicate any argument by ignorance. I think both
atheist and theists are often guilty of ignorance of what I just said.

Immature atheists are often guilty of pursuing the so-called argument of evil.
If God exists and is supremely good, then He wouldn't allow so much suffering in
the world.  But there is so much suffering in the world. Therefore, either God
does not exist or God is not supremely good, but theists will not allow this
second implication. In all argumentation there must be concord in the
understanding of terms and a willingness to track reality. The Jews of old
confessed God's goodness while confessing that He is also terrible
<label for="sn-psalm-terrible"
       class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">
</label>
<input type="checkbox"
       id="sn-psalm-terrible"
       class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
Quoniam magnus Dominus et laudabilis nimis, terribilis est super omnes deos. (Ps. 96)
</span>.
For them, God is good because He is a provider, a Father that punishes
only so much, moderating His anger with acts of mercy. If the atheist finds
this strange, it is for him to grow in culture and as a person. In any case,
reality is a harsh teacher and will not succumb to our concepts. **We** should
adapt our concepts to reality. If God is good while punishing his creatures
for their offenses, thinking He is bad does not change reality.

The difficulty of tracking reality, together with the inconclusiveness of
individual human experience, gives room to all sorts of arbitrariness.
This, I think is why there are so many and so strange opinions in currency today.

</section>

<section>

## A better approach: common-sense

How, then, can we reduce the quantity of arbitrariness in our opinions?  I think
that clarity about the process of human knowing and a desire to track reality,
coupled with logical acuity, is the way to reduce the quantity of arbitrariness
in our opinions. To seek to know the process by which humans come to learn what
they learn may free us from some inherited preconceived ideas about what
rationality is and about what are its commitments.

### The role of community

Humans are not born with innate ideas. Not even our logical perspicuity is
inherit in us. Rather, it is the fruit of training. By the time a child reaches
its age of reason, the child has learned a few factual propositions, and not
only this, but also and ability to detect contradictions. This ability is a
mystery, so far as I know. Each one can only judge by his or her own experience
of understanding a proposition and verifying it by experience; there is a click
in the mind, a light is shone upon us intellectually, and we say the proposition
is true. A false proposition, however, bears with it a sense of intellectual
darkness. A child may not be able to put it to words like that, but the child
sees this and this is clear to us all.  However, we are quick to disregard the
process by which a child comes to its realizations.

A child does not go about making speculations about things and then inductively
producing hypothesis to be tested. A child first learns to associate words with
images, memories and then concepts. After that, when the child has dominion over
concepts, which is verified by dominion over language, a child receives
propositions from the community and accepts them without question. In the
circumstances of a child, this is reasonable; for a child has not enough logic
training to test consistency of handed down information, nor can a child be in
all places to verify what the child is told.

All humans possess 3 sources of knowledge: observation, memory and testimony.
It is a characteristic of our individualistic times to make heroes out of people
who reject community and rely on their resources. Here lies a very dark cultural
predicament which has drown modern man. For, like a child, a man cannot be in
all places, to verify what he is told, nor does he have time to deduce vast sets
of propositions from the little that he knows by observation and memory. Most of what
he knows from school he did not verify either by deduction or experimentation;
most of what informs his practical reasonings is not even attentively
considered. His beliefs 
<label for="sn-beliefs-unchallenged"
       class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">
</label>
<input type="checkbox"
       id="sn-beliefs-unchallenged"
       class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
This holds true for all. Several theists do not test the beliefs they inherited
from family. Several atheists, who begin by becoming practical atheists motivated
by pride, do not challenge, at least adequately, their excessive skepticism.
</span>
often result from trauma not everyone suffers, or still
are from handed down family traditions that he did not have the *interest* to revisit and challenge. 

By pride, he may not recognize his need for the *observation of others*.  The
very fact that large quantities of humans, even those who profess intellectual
carreers, cannot see the illogicality of this rebellion is proof that ***against
pride not even logic will do***.

This predicament is at the same time risible and scary. Most men and women live
like fools, praising intellectual ideals that they cannot live up to.  It is
also scary, for we, and our children, depend on people enchanted by this
illusion.

### Deceit proves the point further



</section>